Hello everyone.
In this lesson we will learn how to smoothly animate or transform one icon shape into another.
In this instance we will be focusing on our top right menu icon.
Let's review what we currently have at the moment.
Our menu icon is simply a square and our goal for this lesson is to UCSF to turn it into the three bars
hamburger menu icon and once it's tapped.
We want to turn that shape into an X to indicate that it can be clicked again to close the menu.
All right.
So now that we know what we want to do let's go ahead and get started.
So the first thing that we should do is remove the background color from this icon element so that it
no longer looks like a solid square.
So let's jump into our text editor and within our styles modules folder let's open up site header dot
CSX.
If we scroll down this file a little bit further than halfway we will find the rule for our menu icon
element and let's just go ahead and remove this background color line.
Now if we save this and check things out in the browser even though we can no longer see that top right
icon it still exists.
We can still tap on it and it still works.
So now our next step is to simply add those three horizontal bars within the currently empty menu icon
div.
So in order to do that let's actually jump into our h t AML file indexed on each GMO and let's scroll
down a bit.
We are looking for the menu icon div.
Here it is.
And in between the opening and closing tags let's drop down to a new line and let's create a new div
that has a class of site header underscore underscore a menu icon underscore underscore top.
Be sure to close out that div.
So our hamburger menu icon should have three horizontal bars and this element will be the top bar in
order to create the middle and bottom bars.
Let's just copy and paste this div.
So let's paste it and change this name to middle and what's pasted in again and change this to bottom.
Let's go ahead and save this and then begin writing the CSF to turn these into the three horizontal
bars.
So back in our site header CSX file within our menu icon rule right before this media query.
Let's create a new line and let's use the ampersand symbol so we don't have to type this out again.
And then we can simply say underscore underscore top.
All right.
So how are we going to create the first horizontal bar.
Well let's use position absolute and say that the top bar should sit in the very top left corner.
And let's say that this bar should have a width of 20 pixels.
Since we know that's how wide the menu icon parent div is let's give the top bar a height of three pixels
and let's give it a background color of white.
Let's go ahead and save this and check things out in the browser.
Perfect.
So there is our top bar.
Now we just need to do the same thing for the middle and bottom bars.
So back in our CSX let's just copy and paste this top bar copy paste it back in and let's change its
name to middle.
And instead of saying that it should be positioned in the very top corner of its parent div let's say
that it should set eight pixels down from the top.
Let's see how that looks in the browser.
Looks good.
Let's create the bottom bar.
We still have this rule in our clipboard so down below the middle rule.
Let's just pasted in again.
Let's change the name to bottom and instead of saying that it should sit at the very top so top zero.
Let's change this to bottom zero.
So it'll set at the very bottom.
Let's check it out in the browser so there is our bottom bar.
But if I zoom in and we look really closely it looks like the gap between the middle and bottom bar
is like one pixel larger than the gap between the top and middle bar.
So to fix that let's just move the bottom bar up a pixel.
So to do that back in our CSX let's actually scroll up to our main menu icon parent element and let's
change its height from twenty pixels to 19 pixels.
Let's check this out in the browser.
And I know it's subtle but I think that looks a lot better.
So at this point our hamburger menu icon is complete.
But before we begin working on transforming it into an X when it gets tapped on.
First I want to show you a way that we can clean up our HD CML a bit.
So back in our text editor let's jump into our index start each TMI file.
Now currently we have these three empty divs to create the three horizontal bars.
But what if I told you we could create that same exact visual effect using only one empty div instead
of three.
So check this out.
Let's delete this top bar and let's also delete the bottom bar.
Let's leave the middle bar intact and let's go ahead and save this.
And then let's jump back into our CSX and this code that was targeting the top div.
Let's change it selector to an ampersand which will use its parent selector and then we can say colon
colon before.
This will create a pseudo element that we can style to look just like the top bar in order to make sure
that this pseudo element appears we can just say content and just include an empty pair of quotes.
So if we go ahead and save this and check out the browser we have a top and middle bar.
So now we just need to perform that same pseudo content trick for the bottom bar.
So if we scroll down a bit here is the bottom rule.
Let's just change this selector to an ampersand colon colon after then let's be sure to say content
a pair of empty quotes.
Let's save this.
And now we have the exact same visual effect but we saved a few bytes in our HDMI out.
Now at this point we are ready to begin transforming this icon into an x.
Once it's tapped on to do this let's edit our javascript for the mobile menu module and let's set things
up so that when this icon is clicked we add a new modifier class to it and then we can simply target
that modifier class with our CSX.
So over in our text editor let's open up the relevant JavaScript file.
It lives in app assets Scripps modules and its name is mobile menu.
Now on this line we can see that we've already saved the menu icon DOM element to this property named
menu icon.
So down within our toggle the menu method let's just add a new line of code that targets the icon element.
So this dot menu icon dot class list dot toggle.
And let's give it a modifier.
Class of site header underscore underscore menu icon dash dash.
And let's call this close x.
Let's save this file and then jump back into our site header CSX file.
Let's find our menu icon rule and let's find the very bottom of this rule
so down here is where that menu icon rule ends.
Let's create a brand new rule.
Let's start with ampersand which will give us site header and then we can say underscore underscore
menu icon and then target that modifier dash dash close x.
And now within this rule we can simply target each of the three horizontal bars and modify them.
However we need to in order to create the x.
Let's begin by targeting the top horizontal bar so we can select it by saying Ampersand colon colon
before.
Let's actually look at the browser really quickly and ask ourselves what do we need to do to the top
bar in order to make this look like an x.
Well we would want to rotate the top bar clockwise about 45 degrees so that it's diagonal.
So over in our CSX let's say transform let's use the rotate function and we want to rotate it 45 degrees
clockwise.
Let's save this and see how it looks.
So when we click on the icon.
Well that's not exactly what we had in mind.
So the top bar now is sitting diagonally but it's positioned very oddly and this is because it's transformed
origin or if you think about it as its pivot point is currently set to its center meaning the center
of this top line is still exactly where it was before the rotation.
That's not what we want.
We want the top left corner of this bar to stay exactly where it is.
So we want the top left corner to be the pivot point.
So let's jump back to our CSX and let's scroll up a bit to find the base find style for that top bar.
Here it is.
And let's add a property named transform or origin.
Now by default web browsers will use a transform origin of 50 percent 50 percent meaning the horizontal
center of the element and the vertical center of the element.
So if we want to set the very top left corner to be the transform origin we can just say zero 0.
Let's save this and check it out in the browser.
So now when we click the icon the top bar is positioned correctly.
But once it's turned diagonally we need to make it a bit longer so that it can reach the very bottom
right corner.
So back in our CSX Let's scroll down to find our close X modifier rule.
And within this same transform line we can add another function the scale function.
And if one is the elements natural size we can increase its size by saying maybe one point two five.
However we don't want to increase the top bars width and height.
We only want to increase its width.
So instead of scale we can actually use scale x.
Let's go ahead and save this and check out the browser and the difference is subtle but now the top
bar reaches the bottom right corner.
All right.
So our top bar is complete.
Next let's focus on our bottom bar in order to create an X shape.
We just need to rotate the bottom bar counterclockwise 45 degrees so that it's diagonal as well.
So back in our C Ss within this close X parent rule.
Let's create a new rule that targets the bottom bar Ampersand colon colon after.
And really we can just copy and paste this line pasted in here the only difference is that instead of
wanting to rotate 45 degrees clockwise we want to rotate counterclockwise so we can just say negative
forty five.
Let's save this.
We see that the bottom bar is now diagonal but its positioning is way off and that's because of its
transform origin or its pivot point.
So back in our C Ss just like we did for the top bar let's scroll up to find the baseline rule for the
bottom bar.
Here it is and let's add trans form origin.
And in this case we actually want the bottom left corner of the element to be the transform origin so
to specify the bottom left corner.
We can say zero to point towards the left corner and then we can say 100 percent to point towards the
very vertical bottom.
Let's save this and check it out.
Looks good but if we zoom in and look really closely to my eye it looks like the bottom bar that is
now pointing towards the top right is sitting maybe just one pixel up too high.
So I'd like to push it down just a single pixel so to do that within our CSF.
Let's scroll back down to our close X modifier rule and while we are adjusting the bottom bar let's
just add on another function named translate Y which allows us to adjust the y coordinate or vertical
positioning for an element and let's just say one pixel.
Let's save this and check out the browser and I know it's a tiny detail but that looks a lot better
to me.
So at this point we have our X. Now we just need to hide the middle bar so within our C Ss within our
close X modifier rule let's create a new rule that targets the middle bar and in this instance we are
not going to begin with an ampersand because that would use this selector as our base and our middle
bar does not have close X in its name.
So what we can do instead is just use a good old fashioned nested rule.
So a dot to look for a class name and then we can just manually type out site header underscore underscore
menu icon underscore underscore middle and when we are trying to create the X shape.
Let's hide the middle bar by setting its opacity to zero.
Let's save this and check out the browser and we now have an X icon.
If we tap it again it turns back into the three bar hamburger icon.
However we don't want to just abruptly switch between these two icons.
We want the shapes in the icons to animate and gradually transform and transition into the other shape
and to make that happen.
All we need to do is go into our CSX scroll up a bit to find the baseline styles
so within our original menu icon rule.
Here is the code for the top bar.
Let's just give it a new property of transition and say that it should gradually transition its transform
property over the course of 300 milliseconds.
And let's use an easy out transition style.
Let's save this.
And check out the browser.
So now when we click on the icon we see that at least the top bar is animating.
So now we just need to apply the transition property to the other two bars to the top bar has been taken
care of on the middle bar.
We want to transition not the transform property but the opacity property over the course of three hundred
milliseconds.
Let's use the easy out transition style and for the bottom bar we want to transition to transform property.
Point three seconds is out.
Let's see how this looks.
That looks excellent.
But I think we could make it look even better if when it transitions from the three bars into the x.
If the middle bar instead of just fading away with opacity.
If it also shrunk from its full width down to zero width this effect that I have in mind might be hard
to describe in words.
But let me just write a bit of CSF so you can see it in action.
So back in our text editor if we scroll down a bit to the close X modifier rules within the code for
the middle bar let's say transform and we want to shrink down its width from 100 percent down to zero
down to nothing.
So let's say scale x 0.
All right.
And then if we scroll back up to the baseline rule for the middle bar let's change the transition line
so that instead of only transitioning the opacity property it transitions all properties.
Let's save this and see what it looks like.
Now it's a very subtle effect.
So let me replay that a few times.
So watch the middle bar.
So instead of just fading away with opacity it's also shrinking away.
Now I think we can improve this even further because currently it's transform.
Origin is its center so you can see that it's shrinking in from both the left and the right.
And I think it would look better if it only shrank in from the right so that it was treating its left
corner as the pivot point.
So back in our code within this baseline rule for the middle bar let's set the transform origin to be
horizontally zero.
So that's the left edge and vertically.
Let's say 50 percent which is the perfect center.
So let's save this.
And now when we click the icon this is exactly what I had in mind.
The middle bar not only fades away with opacity but it also shrinks or retracts it into the left edge.
And that's actually going to bring this lesson to a close.
And at this point our mobile menu is complete now in our next lesson.
We will be changing gears a bit.
We will work on the our features section of the site and we will set things up so that these four feature
items are hidden originally and only when you scroll down just far enough so that they would begin to
become visible.
Only then will we fade them into view.
We will use a nice combination of JavaScript and CSX to make that happen.
It should be a lot of fun.
Let's keep rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.